blog.md, before:

# Testing linearizability with Lincheck

*By [Alexandru Dumtiriu](https://github.com/Alexandru-Dumitriu)
and [Bob Brockbernd](https://github.com/bbrockbernd)*.

# Introduction

We leverage a novel tool, Lincheck, to test popular libraries that use concurrency. Our experiments on certain data structures impelmented in these libraries have led to several interesting findings, both related to the tested frameworks and Lincheck itself. Our main objective in this project is to identify at least one bug in the tested libraries and report it to the developers responsible for maintaining them.

## Linearizability

In their paper ["Linearizability: a correctness condition for concurrent objects"](https://cs.brown.edu/~mph/HerlihyW90/p463-herlihy.pdf), Herlihy and Wing introduce a key criterion for evaluating the correctness of concurrent object implementations. The basic idea is to ensure that although an implementation may not demonstrate every possible interleaving permitted by linearizability, every realized interleaving must comply with the linearizability principle [1]. This means that all operations, regardless of their concurrency, must seem atomic or instantaneous from an external perspective. This strict requirement guarantees the integrity and dependability of concurrent systems, preventing unexpected behaviors or inconsistencies in concurrent operations.


## Sources of non-determinism

Concurrency in programming can be challenging due to non-determinism, especially delays, which can cause errors. Testing data structures can be even more complicated, making it difficult to identify bugs. Stress testing is a common approach, but it is often unable to detect elusive bugs caused by non-determinism. In addition, when different threads access the same data concurrently, an operation that spans multiple instructions in one thread can result in erroneous outcomes if it lacks atomicity. While tools like Lincheck can provide insights into the proximity to linearizability, they cannot guarantee it. Nevertheless, a successful test can boost confidence in the concurrency model's fidelity under real-world scenarios.

# What is Lincheck?

[Lincheck](https://github.com/JetBrains/lincheck) is a robust tool designed to facilitate concurrent testing and verification of thread-safe code. It seamlessly integrates with existing Java or Kotlin code, providing an easy-to-use framework for ensuring the correctness and reliability of concurrent algorithms and data structures.

At its core, Lincheck leverages state-of-the-art techniques to systematically explore the behaviour of concurrent executions. It can simulate various concurrency scenarios, such as multiple threads accessing shared resources concurrently or executing complex transactional operations. The tool meticulously monitors these executions, detecting potential race conditions, data races, and other concurrency bugs. It employs sophisticated algorithms to explore different interleavings of thread executions systematically, aiming to uncover subtle concurrency issues that may arise under specific scheduling conditions.

By utilizing the capabilities of Lincheck, we can conduct tests on some of the most commonly used Java concurrent libraries to confirm their linearizability through the model-checking functionality. If no problems are detected, we can confidently declare that the possibility of concurrency bugs occurring in practical situations is extremely low. However, if any issues are found, we aim to report them, so that they can be fixed in future versions of the libraries being tested.

## The bug detection technique

TODO

## Test Setup

For the tests we use a Windows 11 and a macOS machine with 16 and 64 gb of RAM. This allows us to test the selected data structures in complex scenarios, leveraging up to 16gb of JVM memory.

We use the latest version of all libraries tested and Lincheck as of 17th of April 2024.


## Bug Injection Test

TODO

# Related Work

TODO

# Results

TODO intro

## Guava

TODO

## Multiverse

TODO

## FastUtil

TODO

## Agrona

TODO

# Conclusion

TODO

# References

1. Herlihy, M.P., Wing, J.M.: Linearizability: a correctness condition for concurrent objects. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. (TOPLAS) 12(3), 463–492 (1990)
2. Koval, N., Fedorov, A., Sokolova, M., Tsitelov, D., Alistarh, D. (2023). Lincheck: A Practical Framework for Testing Concurrent Data Structures on JVM. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds) Computer Aided Verification. CAV 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 13964. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37706-8_8
3. The Java Concurrency Stress tests. https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jcstress
4. Musuvathi, M., Qadeer, S.: Iterative context bounding for systematic testing of multithreaded programs. SIGPLAN Not. 42(6), 446–455 (2007)
5. Kokologiannakis, M., Vafeiadis, V.: GenMC: a model checker for weak memory models. In: Silva, A., Leino, K.R.M. (eds.) CAV 2021. LNCS, vol. 12759, pp. 427–440. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81685-8_20


Our implementation is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/bbrockbernd/MultTest).

Commit message:

Add multiple sections to the blogpost: part of results, experiment and related

blog.md, after:

# Testing linearizability with Lincheck

*By [Alexandru Dumtiriu](https://github.com/Alexandru-Dumitriu)
and [Bob Brockbernd](https://github.com/bbrockbernd)*.

# Introduction

We leverage a novel tool, Lincheck, to test popular libraries that use concurrency. Our experiments on certain data structures impelmented in these libraries have led to several interesting findings, both related to the tested frameworks and Lincheck itself. Our main objective in this project is to identify at least one bug in the tested libraries and report it to the developers responsible for maintaining them.

## Linearizability

In their paper ["Linearizability: a correctness condition for concurrent objects"](https://cs.brown.edu/~mph/HerlihyW90/p463-herlihy.pdf), Herlihy and Wing introduce a key criterion for evaluating the correctness of concurrent object implementations. The basic idea is to ensure that although an implementation may not demonstrate every possible interleaving permitted by linearizability, every realized interleaving must comply with the linearizability principle [1]. This means that all operations, regardless of their concurrency, must seem atomic or instantaneous from an external perspective. This strict requirement guarantees the integrity and dependability of concurrent systems, preventing unexpected behaviors or inconsistencies in concurrent operations.


## Sources of non-determinism

Concurrency in programming can be challenging due to non-determinism, especially delays, which can cause errors. Testing data structures can be even more complicated, making it difficult to identify bugs. Stress testing is a common approach, but it is often unable to detect elusive bugs caused by non-determinism. In addition, when different threads access the same data concurrently, an operation that spans multiple instructions in one thread can result in erroneous outcomes if it lacks atomicity. While tools like Lincheck can provide insights into the proximity to linearizability, they cannot guarantee it. Nevertheless, a successful test can boost confidence in the concurrency model's fidelity under real-world scenarios.

# What is Lincheck?

[Lincheck](https://github.com/JetBrains/lincheck) is a robust tool designed to facilitate concurrent testing and verification of thread-safe code. It seamlessly integrates with existing Java or Kotlin code, providing an easy-to-use framework for ensuring the correctness and reliability of concurrent algorithms and data structures.

At its core, Lincheck leverages state-of-the-art techniques to systematically explore the behaviour of concurrent executions. It can simulate various concurrency scenarios, such as multiple threads accessing shared resources concurrently or executing complex transactional operations. The tool meticulously monitors these executions, detecting potential race conditions, data races, and other concurrency bugs. It employs sophisticated algorithms to explore different interleavings of thread executions systematically, aiming to uncover subtle concurrency issues that may arise under specific scheduling conditions.

By utilizing the capabilities of Lincheck, we can conduct tests on some of the most commonly used Java concurrent libraries to confirm their linearizability through the model-checking functionality. If no problems are detected, we can confidently declare that the possibility of concurrency bugs occurring in practical situations is extremely low. However, if any issues are found, we aim to report them, so that they can be fixed in future versions of the libraries being tested.

## The bug detection technique

TODO

## Test Setup

For the tests we use a Windows 11 and a macOS machine with 16 and 64 gb of RAM. This allows us to test the selected data structures in complex scenarios, leveraging up to 16gb of JVM memory.

We use the latest version of all libraries tested and Lincheck as of 17th of April 2024.

TODO

## Bug Injection Test

In order to showcase how Lincheck works in a very simple setting and to prove that it easily detects the appearance of a bug, we will test java.util.concurrent.ConcurrentLinkedQueue and we will also test a version of it in which we inject a bug.

## The bug

We copy the implementation of ConcurrentLinkedQueue and we modify the method with which you add a new value to the queue. The current implementation uses CAS(compareAndSet) to update the next pointer between nodes. This ensures that the operation is atomic and the node that creates the connection is not deleted by a thread in the meantime. By changing this to a much simpler if then statement that is not atomic we inject the bug.

```kotlin
//  if (NEXT.compareAndSet(p, null, newNode)) {
    if (p.next == null) {
        p.next = newNode;
```

# The experiment result

By running the data structure from java.util we are not able to find any bugs and the test passes in around 2 minutes. On the other side, running the implementation with the injected bug leads to a test failure in around 10 seconds due to the non-atomicity of the add operation, allowing the linking with a node previously removed.

![Execution Trace](\images\injected_bug.png)
# Related Work

Lincheck is a tool used for checking linearizability and other concurrency properties, being remarkable for its user-friendliness [2]. Compared to other similar tools like [JCStress](https://github.com/openjdk/jcstress), CHESS (Line-Up), and [GenMC](https://github.com/MPI-SWS/genmc), Lincheck stands out due to its exceptional ease of use. JCStress, while offering robust capabilities, can be challenging for users due to its non-declarative nature [3]. CHESS (Line-Up) is tailored for C# environments and uses Bounded Model Checking to verify properties like linearizability in a very similar manner to Lincheck [4]. GenMC has advanced features, but its ease of expansion is a drawback, which Lincheck is addressing by integrating the GenMC algorithm into its system [5]. Lincheck's most significant strength lies in its accessibility and simplicity. Its straightforward interface and streamlined process empower users to assess linearizability effortlessly without needing to deal with steep learning curves or intricate configurations. In the field of concurrent systems, where precision and efficiency are critical, Lincheck's user-friendly approach makes it an excellent choice for those seeking seamless verification.

# Results

TODO intro

## Guava

TODO

## Multiverse

Multiverse is a powerful Java concurrency library that simplifies the development of multithreaded applications. It comes equipped with a range of tools including atomic variables, lock-free data structures, and fine-grained locking mechanisms. The standout feature of Multiverse is its software transactional memory (STM), which ensures data consistency by encapsulating operations within transactions. This means that operations are either committed as a whole or rolled back in case of failure, similar to database transactions. By using this approach, Multiverse minimizes contention and simplifies complex concurrent operations. This level of control over shared data allows developers to create scalable, error-resilient applications, reducing the risks associated with race conditions and deadlocks that often occur in concurrent programming.

### TxnInteger

In order to test the correctness of this data structure we passed as operations to Lincheck the methods for incrementing and decrementing. Since these operations are implemented to be atomic we were not expecting to find any bugs, but, surprisingly we discovered a bug in Lincheck and we notified the developer about it.

![Lincheck Bug](/images/lincheck_bug.png)

### TxnRef

Similarly to TxnInteger we approached TxnRef and we did not encounter any bugs from either Lincheck or the data structure, obtaining a test pass that means that the operations used(set, get) are atomic and lead to a linearizable implementation.

## FastUtil

TODO

## Agrona

TODO

# Conclusion

TODO

# References

1. Herlihy, M.P., Wing, J.M.: Linearizability: a correctness condition for concurrent objects. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. (TOPLAS) 12(3), 463–492 (1990)
2. Koval, N., Fedorov, A., Sokolova, M., Tsitelov, D., Alistarh, D. (2023). Lincheck: A Practical Framework for Testing Concurrent Data Structures on JVM. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds) Computer Aided Verification. CAV 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 13964. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37706-8_8
3. The Java Concurrency Stress tests. https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jcstress
4. Musuvathi, M., Qadeer, S.: Iterative context bounding for systematic testing of multithreaded programs. SIGPLAN Not. 42(6), 446–455 (2007)
5. Kokologiannakis, M., Vafeiadis, V.: GenMC: a model checker for weak memory models. In: Silva, A., Leino, K.R.M. (eds.) CAV 2021. LNCS, vol. 12759, pp. 427–440. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81685-8_20


Our implementation is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/bbrockbernd/MultTest).
